# Delta-analysis

This repo contains the scripts and data used to generate the results in [CITATION].
Note that several data files cannot be shared due to data sharing agreements and some scripts
may need to be adjusted depending on the local setup.

GISAID terms of use prohibit our sharing of the sequence data used from GISAID. Instead we provide a the
accession IDs used and an acknowledgement table.

### Abstract 
_The Delta variant of concern of SARS-CoV-2 has spread globally causing large outbreaks and 
resurgences of COVID-19 cases. The emergence of Delta in the UK occurred on the background 
of a heterogeneous landscape of immunity and relaxation of non-pharmaceutical interventions. 
Here we analyse 52,992 Delta genomes from England in combination with 93,649 global genomes to 
reconstruct the emergence of Delta, and quantify its introduction to and regional dissemination 
across England, in the context of changing travel and social restrictions. Through analysis of 
human movement, contact tracing, and virus genomic data, we find that the focus of geographic 
expansion of Delta shifted from India to a more global pattern in early May 2021. In England, Delta
lineages were introduced >1,000 times and spread nationally as non-pharmaceutical interventions 
were relaxed. We find that hotel quarantine for travellers from India reduced onward transmission
from importations; however the transmission chains that later dominated the Delta wave in 
England had been already seeded before restrictions were introduced. In England, increasing inter-
regional travel drove Delta's nationwide dissemination, with some cities receiving >2,000 observable
lineage introductions from other regions. Subsequently, increased levels of local population mixing, 
not the number of importations, was associated with faster relative growth of Delta. Among US 
states, we find that regions that previously experienced large waves also had faster Delta growth 
rates, and a model including interactions between immunity and human behaviour could accurately
predict the rise of Delta there. Delta’s invasion dynamics depended on fine scale spatial 
heterogeneity in immunity and contact patterns and our findings will inform optimal spatial 
interventions to reduce transmission of current and future VOCs such as Omicron._

Repository structure:
```
├── analysis
│   ├── UK_continuous_phylogeography
│   │   ├── XMLs
│   │   └── scripts
│   └── global_DTA_analysis
│       ├── outputs
│       │   ├── empirical_trees
│       │   ├── input_trees
│       │   └── transmission_lineages
│       ├── pipeline
│       │   ├── full_run
│       │   └── templates
│       ├── scripts
│       └── xml
└── data
    ├── UK_geog_data
    │   └── UTLA_shapes_final
    └── global_DTA_analysis
        └── trees

```

#### Input data
All input data that we are able to share publically is in the `data` directory.

### Analysis

The `analysis` directory contains subdirectories of the following analyses.

### global_DTA_analysis:
Contains scripts and XMLs for generating the global discrete phylogeographic analysis to obtain estimates of importations into the UK

### global_epidemiology_analysis:
Scripts and model files for estimating risk factors for delta growth can be found in this separate [repository](https://github.com/sumalibajaj/Delta-Statistical-analysis-share).

### UK_continuous_phylogeography:
Contains scripts and XMLs to generate input files, process data and visualise results for the within-uk lineage dynamic analysis

## Data availability

UTLA shapefiles from data.gov.uk, England postcode districts from (Addy 2017, https://datashare.ed.ac.uk/handle/10283/2597). UK_map.json originally contains data from gadm.org, but has been edited and customised since.

The O2 aggregated, anonymised mobile data insights dataset is not publicly available owing to stringent licensing agreements. Information on the process of requesting access to the O2 aggregated mobile data insights dataset is available o2@businesso2.co.uk. The Google COVID-19 Aggregated Mobility Research Dataset is not publicly available owing to stringent licensing agreements. Information on the process of requesting access to the Google mobility data is available from sadilekadam@google.com.

UK genome sequences used were generated by the COG-UK consortium (https://www.cogconsortium.uk/). Data linking COG-IDs to location have been removed to protect privacy, however if you require this data please visit https://www.cogconsortium.uk/contact/ for information on accessing consortium-only data.
